Okay, this is Ron Shorn. Okay, this is Ron Shorn
interviewing Heiss Spinrad at Heiss Home in
Moraga, California on June 9th, 1993. Heida, just
for the record, what's your full name? Heiren
Spinrad. How do you spell that?
H-Y-R-O-N-S-P-I-N-R-A-D.
When were you born? Long ago. What date? February
17th, 1934. And where were you born? New York. What
part of New York? Bad part. Brooklyn? Actually, I
think I was born in New York City, but I lived in
Brooklyn after the first week. How did you get
interested in astronomy? My grandmother was
interested in a lot of intellectual things,
family not having an extraordinarily
intellectual background. I'm not sure where that
started. But in any case, she brought several
books home when I was, gosh, I don't know, between
five and seven years of age. and I was interested in
looking at the sky. When I was eight years old,
during World War II, New York became blacked out,
and therefore the sky got dark. So you could
actually see the stars in the Milky Way, and
everything that was supposed to be there was
there. That was fairly inspiring to a young kid. So
I think it was my grandmother's influence and the
fact that I could see the sky and wonder about it
that got me started, and then I got a small
telescope of relatively low quality that was
adequate to see a few double stars and perhaps
maybe barely the phases of Venus. And that helped a
lot, too. That was from some kind of pawn shop, I
think. Did this interest in astronomy carry
through high school? No, not vividly. In high
school, I sort of got away from that. I was more
interested in in sports, and I still did okay in
physics and chemistry and mathematics, but I
didn't really have my heart in it. On the other
hand, I didn't know what else to do when I went to
start my undergraduate education at Berkeley, so
I decided I would be an astronomer unless
something better came along. How come Berkeley if
you were born in New York City? Yes, good point. My
family and I moved to California in 1946 when I was
12 years old, in junior high school. So I did my
junior high school and high school curriculum in
San Francisco. Berkeley was nearby, in those days
very inexpensive, and I could live there and not
break the bank, which was relatively thin. So were
you an astronomy major? Yeah, I was an astronomy
major initially by default. Then after I took a
class with Struve, I knew I really liked it. I don't
know if he had a reputation of being a good teacher,
but he was inspirational, whether he knew it or
not. When did you get your bachelor's degree?
Bachelor's degree was in 55. And then you went to
grad school? No, I was in the Army for two years in
between, in the Philippines, Marianas,
Carolinas, and Western US, measuring stellar
occultations under John O'Keefe's project,
which was to find the location of everything
between the West Coast and China for unpeaceful
reasons. Middle of the Cold War, of course. Yeah.
What did you... What was your thesis on? My thesis
was the stellar content of nearby bright
galaxies. I did that with Whitford and Mayall,
predominantly. Did you pick that, or did they pick
it for you? I picked it, actually, which was
perhaps slightly unusual, and that made it a
little bit hard to find the appropriate advisor,
but it turned out that those two men... Male and
Woodford actually were perfect for this, and I
learned a lot from them. Why did you pick that
topic? Why were you interested in it? I've always
been interested in stellar spectra and the
stellar content of galaxies I thought could be
attacked in that way, and Morgan and Male had just
come out with a paper doing a little bit of that in a
very qualitative way. So it was somewhat of an
outgrowth of the interest in stars and the
timeliness of it and the availability of...
relatively modest, or now we would say very
modest, equipment on medium-sized telescopes.
Which was like the Crossley, 36 inches. 0.9
meters, yeah, 36 inches. I used both 36 inches at
Lick, actually, the Crossley more than the
refractor. When did you get your Ph.D.? Ph.D. was
in 61. Okay, and where did you go from there? Right
to JPL. How come? Well, that was strange. Yeah,
yeah, I know. Sagan had come to Berkeley in 60, I
guess, as a Miller... fellow after his PhD from
Chicago. And he was the first person around
Berkeley to talk about planets in what then seemed
a modern way, exploring them by spacecraft,
exploring them in other ways, and doing more than
just a few poorish review articles of the previous
generation would suggest. Certainly Berkeley at
the time was not a hotbed of planetary astronomy.
It was some celestial mechanics, of course, going
on. How did you pick JPL, or did they come around? I
interviewed a bunch of places. I wanted to stay in
California if possible for family reasons
predominantly, and I checked out A couple places.
There were industrial places that were looking
for astronomers then, too, although those jobs
later turned out to be kind of ephemeral. What,
like North American aviation? Aeroneutronics
from Ford.
Lockheed, I think, were, in general, not so much
the time I was actually looking around. a couple
other places whose names I've gracefully
forgotten. Were those places funded by the Air
Force or by NASA or what? I'm not really sure. Never
dug into it that deeply. Probably anything they
could come up with. So probably all those. Anyway,
JPL was another one on the list, and I went down
there and checked out Caltech. Greenstein had a
postdoc available, and JPL did them sort of both in
the same week. And... Of course, Greenstein would
have been interested in me working on stars with
his abundance program. And of course, JPL would
have been, at that time, happy to get an
astronomer. Who got the Greenstein thing? I don't
remember. Probably Sargent. Or Bob O'Dell or
something. O'Dell did get something down there,
but I think that was at Carnegie, actually. It was
about the same time, within a few months. The
O'Dells and our family actually were in the same
apartment complex, and the two wives met by
accident over a clothesline. It's a funny story in
itself. Okay, you arrived at JPL. Were you their
first Ph.D. astronomer? Yeah, I think so. Of
course, Ray Newbern had been there for some time
before. Who was your boss? Was Lou Kaplan the boss
there? Not yet. No, there was another guy who
really didn't have a technical background who was
the de facto section boss. But in practice, Ray was
just about that without the stature or pay. And
when you got there and looked around, what did you
think of the place? I mean, there weren't any big
telescopes or anything. No, there weren't any big
telescopes, which created a problem that we'll
talk about shortly. That was, of course, a very
severe problem. But initially, I wasn't panicked
about that. The main job I was assigned to do at
first, supposedly halftime, but I had no idea what
fractional time would be, was to coordinate an
instrument designed by Dr. Charles Barth, who
then was at JPL, a UV spectrometer, I think, to get
ultraviolet spectra of planets from spacecraft.
I'm not positive if the first one was a, A Mariner
Venus probably was, but I'm not positive of that
any longer. In any case, so I was supposed to
coordinate Barth and his engineers and the rest of
the project, which seemed like a strange role for a
fresh PhD who didn't know ultraviolet from the
bomber limit and certainly had no previous
experience dealing with interesting and
creative and, to be brutally frank about it, quite
egotistical personalities. But you learn when
you do these things. And actually, that turned out
to be mildly interesting and took much less of my
time than I thought it would. So I did actually have
time to initiate research if I wanted to. And I did a
little bit of continued work on galaxies, but I
figured I wasn't being paid by JPL to do that. So I
figured I would look into the possibilities in
planetary astronomy in areas that I had a little
bit of previous knowledge, that is spectroscopy
of the planets, and was annoyed to find that there
wasn't any modern data. There certainly was no
prospect of more coming in, at least nothing that I
would have any involvement in. And therefore, I
turned to the old historical data, which
astronomers generally keep forever, especially
in the days where photography was the prime method
of recording information. It's actually easier
to document photographic plate files than it is to
get people's CCD images in 1993. That's getting
far afield. So in any case, I sort of fell upon the
Mount Wilson plate files, and that turned out to be
an interesting intro to planetary astronomy.
These were mainly photographic spectra taken by
Dunham and associates in the late 30s and through
World War II at a relatively low pace. At which
telescopes? Ah, sorry. Mostly at the 100-inch
telescope. This is pre-200-inch, and the
200-inch spectrograph wasn't particularly
better than the 100-inch anyway. So it was
100-inch Coudet spectra, by and large, although
there were other types of spectra. But those were
the ones that had the most recorded information
and seemed to be amenable to some kind of new
quantitative or semi-quantitative analysis.
And they were done when the seeing was too poor to do
stellar astronomy. I'm not sure if it was
completely that. I mean, Dunham actually was a
staff member. So it wasn't, I don't believe, I
don't know the politics back that far precisely.
But my guess is that he probably didn't have to beg
as hard as an outsider would. But they were
definitely not done during prime hours. Some of
them were done in the daytime. I think a lot of them
were done after the sun was down or else there would
have been more scattered light on them. What did
you get out of them? Well, I got some things which
later turned out not to be quite correct, but
nevertheless, at the time they seemed
interesting. I was trying to measure the physical
parameters of the atmosphere of Venus from a study
of the carbon dioxide bands in the near-infrared,
which at high dispersion can give you information
on the rotational temperature of the CO2 gas,
which ought to be in a high-density atmosphere
equal to the kinetic temperature of the
atmosphere at whatever optical depth is
appropriate. That's a little tricky in a cloudy
atmosphere, but neglecting that complication,
it sounded like a good idea to look at whether Venus
was hot or cold a little bit deeper in the
atmosphere than infrared or such measures could
at the time do easily. And secondarily, if you
measure the line widths carefully and if there are
no other broadening mechanisms, you can get some
idea of the pressure also at the mean optical
depth. Now the last part, I think, was done with
some naivete, as you'll look back on it 30 years.
But of course, when you started, it was better than
anything else in the field. Definitely. Yes. I
asked Bill Sinton about the Sinton band, so I've
got to ask High Spinrad about the effect Spinrad.
Oh, the Jovian line tilt. Yes. I still haven't
quite figured that one out. Let me give a little
preface on that. Why does one have to get your name
attached to all things both good and bad? In any
case... The ammonia and methane lines in the
spectrum of Jupiter, when the spectrograph slit
is placed along the equator to get the rotational
velocity, turn out to be tilted approximately
half as much as the reflected lines from the solar
spectrum. The factor of two comes in basically
just a moving mirror. And our aspect on Earth, in
the simplest of geometries, when the Sun, Earth,
and the outer planet, like Jupiter, are lined up,
give you just precisely a factor of two, because
one of the components is Sun-Jupiter. and the
other Jupiter-Earth, and in the case of the
methane and ammonia bands, which are physically
from the Jovian atmosphere, you only get one of
those. So that tilt should be a factor or two less.
And on some spectra that Munch had obtained and
perhaps... This is Guido Munch. Guido Munch, yes,
professor of astronomy at Caltech at the time. It
looked like the tilts were rather less than that,
as if the ammonia wasn't co-rotating with the...
atmospheric velocity. The trouble is the tilt was
so different from a half that the velocity
difference you predict turns out to probably be
supersonic, which was a bit weird. But as an
empiricist, I was quite willing to accept the
observations. I'm not quite sure what's
happened. But every time anybody else, including
me, in future years tried to reproduce the
observations, which again were fairly old at the
time, that the strange deviation from half the
expected tilt did not reproduce. So I've always
assumed that there was some peculiarity in the way
I measured the plates, but it doesn't really make
complete sense. So I'm not 100% sure now what went
wrong, but I'm pretty sure something did. I don't
believe it's a physical effect. It drew a lot of
attention, again, to planetary astronomy, but
not necessarily for the best of reasons. Did you
try and get Telescope Time to do New Spectrum?
Yeah, sure. And that was a long and cluttered
story, which basically was mostly unsuccessful.
Well, it was obvious that one could do better by
doing things yourself when you knew what the
problem was going to be, or in many cases, with
improved instrumentation. I mean, this is still
the era of photography, but, for example, in
near-infrared spectroscopy, four-end plates
had replaced one-ends, and those had much higher
acuity. And generally, just the idea of doing
something yourself when you know what was
happening at the telescope is better than going
down to some archaic file and not knowing all
circumstances except what's written on the
envelope of the plate. So at first I made casual
approaches to various observers and observatory
directors at Mount Wilson, at McDonald, back at
Lick, old stomping grounds. And these were not
greeted generally with much enthusiasm for
perhaps several reasons I'm not positive which
ones were the most important. Planetary
astronomy still was not considered part of
mainstream astronomy, and I think this was
probably the largest factor in the sense that
directors and other people that ran
observatories were worried perhaps about
wasting valuable observing time. So in other
words, real astronomers looked down on planetary
astronomy. Yeah, for better or for worse, that was
the case at the very beginning of the space age. I
mean, obviously it evolved, but initially that
was true. Were you ever told you made your choice
between money and telescope time? Not in writing.
But orally? Yeah. And we're slightly more
diplomatic than that. I won't, in fact, mention
the person that said it the most bluntly, because
it's a guy you don't even know. But yeah, I was told
that, and it was painful. JPL, of course, for those
uninitiated, paid a lot more than a low-level
academic job. starting salaries at JPL were twice
that of a postdoc and probably, I'm just guessing,
40 or 50% higher than an assistant professor would
have been at the same time. So for a fresh PhD, it was
a lot of money. Now, technically, JPL was a part of
Caltech. Yes. But practically, it was not. Is that
correct? Yes, there was a vast chasm that
separated the
stature, so to speak, of JPL scientists with
Caltech Science. In some cases, that was at least
true, in some areas. That wasn't true in every
endeavor. I think the people that did radio and
radar astronomy were considered colleagues of
equal footing, perhaps. But in any case, yes,
Caltech was not a cooperative partner in any sense
of the word, with one major exception, and that was
the influence of Gito Munch, professor of
astronomy at Caltech. Gito, for his own personal
interests, was interested in a variety of topics,
very, very broad person, and one of those was
planetary astronomy. So on his own, he was doing a
fair amount of observing of planets, but even more
importantly, from my own personal viewpoint, he
was around as a pseudo-mentor. I mean, he's the
last person on Earth that would probably like to be
accused of being a good teacher. But in any case,
Like it or not, he was in his own strange way. You
were reduced to looking for water vapor on planets
at Victoria, British Columbia, were you not?
Excellent choice, wouldn't you think? All right,
so that's a long story. Any case, let me make it
quite abbreviated. Water on Mars is a long, long
story, which, in fact, you have documented well.
My own interest in that came, again, just from
reading the review papers by Richardson, Dunham,
and other folks. And then the first attempts to try
to observe water from balloon altitudes by, I
think, Dollfuss, actually, was the first,
perhaps, to be successful. And people had thought
about this before. And there have been attempts at
Lowell Observatory also. The trick, of course, is
to have a dry site on Earth and or a Doppler shift to
move out the telluric lines from the Martian ones.
The Mars lines, obviously, were going to be very
weak since we know there's not very much water on
Mars if you spread out the polar caps, assuming
that they're half water or something like that.
You don't get a lot of water in the atmosphere at the
temperatures relevant to Mars. So I tried to get
time at Mount Wilson. And that would have required
using the 100 inch. The snow telescope, which I did
use for Venus, was inadequate even for Venus,
unfortunately. It was OK for getting a spectrum of
the sun, however. I learned a little bit by using
it. But that was as much as the observatory
committee and Director Bowen was willing to give
to me. So I asked other places at Lick. I got a polite
reply from Director Albert Whitford, who
remarked that they had just gotten their big
telescope, the three-meter, what's called the
Shane, but now the Shane, a three-meter
telescope, had just gone on the air there, and they
had been second-rate citizens to the Mount Wilson
Palomar folks for so long that they weren't
anxious to give time away to, quote, Caltech,
unquote, and Whitford remarked that I should try
here. Which is a logical thing to say. He wasn't
trying to be particularly mean about it. It was
very defensible. Nevertheless, nothing came of
that. I tried also, I think, that early at
McDonald's, but I'm not positive it was really at
that time. Was this before Harlan took over? Oh,
yes. When Kuiper was still director. I think
actually I had to do it through the University of
Chicago. Maybe I didn't, but I did. In any case, it
was definitely before Harlan Smith. Well, let's
continue on that now. So I ended up then finding
out, I don't remember who told me, that they had a
new 40-inch telescope, 48-inch telescope at
Victoria, British Columbia, which is, of course,
an insane place to go looking for water. Well, you
find it very locally. Yes, you can hardly avoid it.
But even on a clear night, it's not particularly
dry. It's about as wet a side as you can. And it's far
north, too. It's far north. Elevation is about 100
meters. It's a real wet place. On the other hand,
they've got a good telescope and a nice modern
spectrograph that had been built by Harvey
Richardson. So I got some time there with no more
difficulty than suggesting a collaboration with
Richardson, who had a mild interest in planetary
work. And I don't know why they gave me time, but
they did. I think it was something like a couple
weeks a year, which was a heck of a lot for their
second most powerful telescope and certainly
their modern telescope. So we got some
observations despite the usual difficulties
with weather up there. Not good enough to find
water on Mars or Venus, but we got some good enough
spectra to be interesting and to whet everybody's
appetite and to show that modern spectra, after we
learned how to you know, walk and climb a bit
ourselves, we're clearly going to be superior to
the material from the 30s and 40s. No surprise.
Now, probably next comes the Kaplan, Munch, and
Spinrad work, or Kaplan's team, as it was called,
which was your idea, but will you explain how that
got going? Sure. Now we're going to... 1963? Yeah,
the observation was made on April 12, 1963. I
remember it very distinctly, of course. for a
variety of egotistical reasons. In fact, I told my
current students in 1993 that there was an
anniversary that had something to do with Mars.
And I was waiting for them to guess it. No one did. It
was very humbling. So yesterday's prize is long
forgotten. What have you done for us lately? Yes.
Well, anyway, this got started by a continuation.
We realized that observing from Victoria wasn't
the smartest way to look for a minuscule amount of
water on Mars. We had no idea, of course, that we
could detect Martian CO2. Never entered a
conversation. It was all argon in the atmosphere
of Mars. Nitrogen and argon. Nitrogen and argon,
yeah. No, there was the CO2 detection, but it was so
small, we thought, that in the obstacle band,
there was no prayer. So it never entered a
conversation. So everything was optimized for
the H2O band at 8,200 angstroms, which was
stronger than the one we observed at Victoria. We
did the 7,200 angstrom region. I don't remember
why. I think the glaze of the grating or something
like that. And then Guido insisted that we use
forend plates, partly because he wanted to find
out how fast it could be after you hyped them. Where
did you stumble on this hyperization with ammonia
as opposed to cold water that Mount Wilson used? It
had been around for a while. I don't know who
invented it. It had been in the folklore before
Guido, but I had not used it. I don't know who heard
about it, but Munch knew a bit more about it than I.
Whose idea was it to go after Mars, that particular
maximum Doppler show? No, that was mine. Okay.
Just a natural carryover from the victorious
time. And then you what? You broached it to Guido
and he used it? Yeah, and he had time coming up, so it
was all his time. We didn't get any new time or
special director's discretion for it or not. On
the other hand, Munch wasn't about it. to have
anybody push him off the telescope for any reason.
I mean, it was his time, man. He'd do what he darn
well pleased, senor. And how did Luke Kaplan get
involved in it? Kaplan was in the game. At that
time, he was then the section leader on the basis of
encouragement. I mean, he was an advocate of doing
these things, as well as preparing for space
experiments. And what happened, fortunately, is
that Munch and I went up to the mountain. Guido
showed me how to use the 100-inch Coudet, which
wasn't all that trivial. I felt slightly
overwhelmed, but we used it. And the first night,
we tried a one-end plate on Mars. It was a pretty
good night. And it came out all right, but it wasn't
anything outstanding. Then we tried a four-end
that we had hyped that afternoon, and it was
useless because we had overexposed it. It was too
sensitive. We figured it was going to be less
sensitive than the one-end, but it was actually
more sensitive. So that was useless. Which was not
the party line. It was not the conventional
wisdom. Well, if you don't hype them, it's down a
factor of 50, roughly. So the hypersensitization
was extraordinarily effective. I mean, it's an
art, like grinding up lizards. Here are my scars
from McDonald. Yes, that's right. When you do this
in the dark, besides sniffing the ammonia, it's
subject to occasional failure of all sorts. I
mean, the blood doesn't really help much. Okay, so
you're on your second night now. Yeah, the second
night, Guido had left. Guido had other activities
besides astronomy and didn't want to stay up in the
mountain for the whole run, which I think was
actually scheduled for four nights. This is now
April 12, 1963. So I exposed a forend plate to Mars
for, I don't know, over the order of three hours. I
don't remember the exact exposure time. And we got
a spectrogram, and I was going to start another
one. Mars was at quadrature, of course, to get the
velocity, but I guess it was far enough north that
you could do more than one. So I started the next
one, and it clouded up. So I had plenty of time to go
in and develop a plate, waiting for the clouds to go
away or Mars to set or whatever was going to happen.
And I looked at it, and I could tell it was a good
plate. Even then, slightly overexposed, but not
much. Had fairly good spatial resolution, good
spectral resolution, nice contrast on a forend,
which is one of the reasons you use it. And then
basically, I put it aside and said, hey, I'll get a
few of these, and we'll look at them, or we'll add
them all up, or do something terribly clever. No
one had thought of digital things then, of course,
because it was still analog type of analysis. And I
put it away. Well, unfortunately, it wasn't just
clouds. The next day it got colder and colder, and
finally it started snowing. So the rest of the run
was wiped out. I came home kind of disconsolate,
having one probably pretty good plate, but I don't
know. I didn't see anything in the hypo, so I didn't
make a big deal of it and sort of got on with my life
for a couple days. After a few days, I said, oh, my,
let's look at the thing and see if at least we can see
the water lines visually, and maybe they'll show
up. By golly, I think they did, especially over one
third of the exposure. I'm not sure I knew exactly
which way it was up at the time. I had to figure out
which polar cap it was. But they were there. But the
outstanding thing was not noticed until about a
week later. And for some reason, I decided to
compare the spectrum of Mars to a Venus spectrum
that I had from the same instrument taken by Dunham
a long time ago. And of course, the quality of the
new one, especially on a 4N, was far greater. But
the nice thing about the Venus old spectrum was
that it showed me where the 8689 carbon dioxide
band was located. And by golly, when I looked at the
Mars spectrum, there were the lines. Much, much
weaker, but unmistakable. And you could match
them line for line. Yeah, it just blew me away. So I
went hooping and hollering around the trailers.
found Kaplan right away, had him look at it. He
wasn't much used to looking at spectra, but he
could see it, too. And then called up Guido. He
refused to believe it for a few minutes. I don't
remember if he came up to look the same afternoon or
the next day. But we knew right away that that meant
that there was more carbon dioxide on Mars than
people had reckoned before by a lot. Because this
was intrinsically not- It's a weak band. It
doesn't depend very much on the gas pressure.
Total gas pressure is mostly just dependent on the
column of carbon dioxide. So it's an unavoidable
conclusion that there had to be more CO2. So either
there had to be more atmosphere on Mars than anyone
thought, or the atmosphere, if thin, had to be
predominantly carbon dioxide. And those were
conclusions one could work out in your head
without even calculating a number. So that was
KMS-1, which got published on January 1, 1964. How
did the JPL publicity department handle this? I
can't remember. I think there was some interest in
it. As you recall, you got a pressure of, what was
it, finally? 25. 25 millibars. 25 plus or minus.
And the standard Girard de Bacallure is 80-ish?
Yeah, 84 plus or minus 5 or 85 plus or minus 4. I could
check that out. But they were already designing
entry capsules for the 85 millibar. Yeah, right.
That was just about happening that way for, what
was it, The first entry, well, Mariner 4, of
course, was supposed to be a flyby. It was a flyby.
First entry was a ways downstream, but clearly
they needed to know that. So what did this do to
planetary astronomy? Well, as soon as anybody
believed it, which happened actually pretty
quickly, because Owen and Kuiper got confirming
observations relatively quickly. I don't
remember if it was exactly the same season. How
long between quadratures? Six? Not that long.
Maybe they got it on the other side. I don't know. It
might not have been that season. Four months?
Yeah. Or maybe six. But anyway, it wasn't a real
long time. So it got confirmed like in a year or
less. And then people definitely were taking it
seriously. Re-examining old archives and mostly
re-examining the assumptions that went into the
surface pressure determinations. Which then,
look, the after a while, a lot weaker than they had
in 1963. Now, you recall that I was at headquarters
during some of this time from 63 in June to
September in 64. And during that time, John Strong
came in with a balloon flight that found an
enormous amount of, well, many times more water
vapor in the atmosphere of Mars than you did,
which caused great consternation at
headquarters. And at least in headquarters, the
people who weren't spectroscopists said, well,
we don't know who to believe. What did you think
about it? Well, you know, water can be temporal up
to a point, right? So you could imagine changes.
But, you know, I was a relatively brash young man. I
tend to believe what I do. Well, he had something
like 85...
What units did we used to use? Precipitable
microns, I think. Great unit. Averaged over the
entire disk. Yeah, enormously higher. I would
have said 10 or 15 over the North Pole. I think
that's what we did say. Okay, now, when I got back to
headquarters, that was that Harlan Smith was now
in high gear at the University of Texas, and he and I
had started the 107-inch, and as I recall, You and I
got a run at McDonald's. 82-inch. 82-inch, which
lasted a month. Yeah, it was incredible. And I
guess I got there a week or so earlier because the
picture graph was in pieces. Right. You put it
together completely. I never got in that stage. It
was probably more than a week. That was December of
64, I think. Yeah, that's right. When you first
heard of this, how did... I forget now how this
went. I mean, who did Harlan call? You or me or both
of us? I don't know if I know. Probably both of us.
And then I recall I was upstairs guiding or
ammoniating or developing or something, and I
came down, and you and Harlan were outside the
library at the 82-inch arranging the observing
schedule for the next year, which must have been a
very unusual situation for you. What about face?
Famine to feast? Completely unusual. It doesn't
happen now either, believe me. Would you say that
for a long time, McDonald was the only place where
it was not only safe, not only popular, but even
safe to do planetary astronomy? Well, it was all
changing. By 64 and 65, while it might not have been
the focus of everyone's pride and attention, it
was no longer in the closet, so to speak. Mm-hmm.
And by the time I got back to Berkeley as a faculty
member, which was in February 64, and then I could
use Lick, an automatic write, I could ask for coup
d'etat time to do whatever darn well I pleased, and
I did. So I worked on Venus and Mars at Lick. In fact,
some of our joint paper on the Mars water and CO2 for
that opposition comes from Lick, and a little bit
more from McDonald's. So it was okay. I mean, I
don't know if people cared one way or the other
then. I think it was clear then that exploring the
planets was going to be interesting, both from the
ground and from spacecraft. So it just wasn't as
hot culture to look down your nose at planetary
astronomy. So that was beginning to change. But on
the other hand, McDonald was a place that one could
really do a lot. I mean, at Lick, Herbig would get a
few spectra every year and then actually tire of
it. And I did it for a few years. And Larry Giver, as a
student, did a little bit with Herbig. But other
than that, there wasn't a lot of planetary
astronomy. And then, of course, Kid Peek started
coming in, so people like Toby Owen. Exactly. Now,
Kid Peek didn't have all the prejudices of the
past. They didn't have that excess strange
baggage. The only thing Kid Peek might have had a
little prejudice against, but I don't think it
really ever showed, was a Kuiper-type jealousy
when Kuiper was across the street at U of A. But I
don't think that mattered much. And Kuiper had his
slightly smaller telescopes on northeast of
Tucson. So by then, the observational effect was
getting pretty good. I mean, the observational
situation was unique. Yeah, but McDonald was a
unique thing at first. The first years of the
82-inch Kudai, and then you know more about the
107-inch, which actually I've never used. than I,
but that was a wonderful opportunity. So it went
from famine to feast. Why did you leave JPL? Oh,
partly because of the frustration of not having a
telescope that I could say I had a real bite on, and
partly for family reasons to get back in the Bay
Area, and partly because I was more interested in
having an academic-type career than one at a place
where things were a little bit more regimented.
Although JPL, I'd say in general, treated me quite
well. I was probably treated better than the
average scientist there that was supposed to have
a functional job to help coordinate spacecraft
things between engineers and scientists, for
example. And they ended up doing 10% functional
work instead of 50%. So I can't complain about
that. But the environment was not quite what I had
wanted to do for the rest of my career. So in 64, I
moved from From Pasadena. Why did you slowly drift
out of planetary work? Because there are
opportunities all over. I'm interested in the
whole universe. I still do cometary work. One of my
students is working on Io. So I did it indirectly.
I'm never completely out of it. I certainly don't
do it full time. And I'm not up with the literature
the way I might have been at one time. But it's part
of the universe that I enjoy. And it's near enough
that you can use different techniques. If the
techniques get too easy or the spacecraft do it
all, then clearly I would look for something a
little more challenging. Just as a little
personal aside, what was your first meeting with
Harlan Smith and how did he impress you?
I corresponded with Smitty about RLR stars a
little bit because he did his thesis on light
curves of RLR stars, I believe, or something like
that at Yale. And I was interested in doing that as a
student project under the direction, to some
extent, of George Preston when I was a second-year
graduate student before I knew the names of the
satellites of Saturn or what Gibbous meant.
I don't know when I met him first physically. Well,
he certainly wasn't like your typical Mount
Wilson Palomar director, was he? No, no. Smitty
was a very open... not necessarily wearing a tie
and stiff shirt type person, would never have
known he was an observatory director. While the
prototypical director of the early 60s was
someone that had grown up in an earlier time and was
much more formal than that. What was planetary
astronomy like when you started in 61 and 62?
small in some disrepute but with you know with
enough promise just because it hadn't been
attacked very much that it looked interesting and
also of course the prospect of getting direct
information from the space probes if they had ever
worked at the time when i started in 61 nothing was
working and rangers were crashing into the moon
and you know couldn't get to the moon successfully
let alone mars or venus so it looked like it might be
a bit of a long haul but clearly the impetus was
there was a national goal to to the moon and beyond.
So I figured that there would be lots of
opportunities in non-traditional astronomy, if
not the traditional. But of course, it turned out
the traditional was still wide open also. What do
you think is the best piece of work in planetary
astronomy you've done? We're going to chisel on a
tombstone. Oh, my.
Certainly the most dramatic and the part I can
relive if I feel self-depressed is that detection
of CO2 on the Mars spectrogram. That was the one
moment where it all flashed in front of you. As soon
as I saw the lines, believed they were real, I knew
in less time than it takes the neurons to move
around, I guess, that this was important because
there was a lot more CO2 than people had thought.
And actually working out the detailed surface
pressure took a little while. That, I think, is the
flashiest thing. It turned out to be more or less
right. What was the most fun? That or something
else? Well, that was fun instantaneously. I don't
know. All of it's fun. All of it's fun. We already
talked about dead ends or misfires, so we'll skip
that question. Lots of those. I mean, working on
comets now is a lot of fun. They're pretty
fascinating. You can get surprises. Comets were
always acceptable. Isn't that strange? Even in
the 20s and 30s. I wonder why. I mean, the physics
was a little bit more like stellar or gaseous
nebulae astrophysics, a little bit. The people
that did the laboratory stuff and
identifications for comets were well-regarded
folks. Phillips did C2 and Cn. Identifications of
other things were by Swings, who certainly was a
famous and extremely well-regarded astronomer,
no matter what he did. I don't know if that's the
reason or not. No, you weren't a pariah if you
worked on comets. I mean, Greenstein did it in
1956. Nobody seemed to mind. Have
you had any direct NSA funding since you left JPL?
Yeah, yeah. How have they treated you? I mean,
normally. Do you think the folks at headquarters
or whoever's handling your stuff understand what
you're doing? Do they keep up with this? Yeah,
because Rahe is the program director. And when I'm
working on comments, he probably knows almost as
much about the specific subject as I. I've been
treated well by them in recent years. So no gripes
about mismanagement, I mean, micromanagement or
anything like that? Not at all, no. Do they try and
tell you what to do? Nope. Not now.
I mean, you know, I get review remarks from the
committees. The scientific review committees
aren't always flattering. But that's normal,
isn't it? Right, yeah. Where do you think
planetary astronomy would be today without NASA?
It's very hard to tell whether it would have ever
caught on again. It would have. Somebody would
have blundered across something by accident that
would have turned it around. But it might have
taken a long, long time. I mean, it was in a deep well
for not its own fault for some years. And it's very
hard to say. But for NASA, in its own
blunderbuss-type approach, I think it helped.
Which brings me to the point, all the participants
are dead, so all we've got is the opinions of live
people. What do you think killed astronomy,
basically killed as an active field? I know there
was a little bit done in the 20s and 30s and 40s in
planetary astronomy. But it was a moribund field.
And at the turn of the century, it was not. Was it
that other fields opened up, or that they ran into
instrumental barriers, like no good infrared
detectors, or just what? It's hard to say.
Percival Lowell? Lowell did something, but that
was earlier. I don't think that should have had an
effect from, say, the 40s through 1960. But there
were so few people of confidence in the field in the
late 50s. I mean, Kuiper and who else was there?
Chamberlain was just getting started. I don't
know if he was a full-fledged planetary
astronomer or would have called himself that or
something else. Who else was outstanding in
planetary astronomy. Erpik did a lot of other
things. He did some planetary astronomy that was
good, but of course in the States that didn't get
recognition at the time. And swings, of course, in
Europe, but that was a part-time affair for him. I
don't know. I mean, Kuiper, of course, had a
reputation that was antagonistic, so people
didn't like him personally in some cases. That may
have played some role, but basically I'm not quite
sure I can put my finger on it, but Certainly other
fields of astronomy and astrophysics seem to have
more simplistic and direct physical answers. The
problems are tough on planets. I mean, in the case
of the rocky planets, I'll include Mars mostly in
that, Moon, Mars, Jupiter, and then the small
things. Basically, it was thought that only
geologists could have an impact there. And then
the atmosphere of Venus was, well, studied by
Dunham and Adams. And they found CO2. And what can
you do after that? So I don't know. The field was
thought to be sterile. New techniques hadn't
advanced to the point where they could make a big
contribution. For example, if we had infrared
detectors of high quality and infrared
spectrometers in 1960, the way we do in 1990
something, clearly that would have opened up a lot
of doors. But it seemed to be a combination. I'm not
sure there's a terribly easy explanation for it.
I've been asking certain people particularly
about the formation of the DPS and Icarus, but this
holds for all fields of astronomy in this country
where 30 years ago all we had was an American
Astronomical Society basically, and then we had
the APJ and the AJ, and that was kind of it. ASP. ASP,
right. That was very local, though. But that was
about it. Now we have these separate divisions of
the American Astronomical Society, and most of
them, or a lot of them, with their own journals. Is
this good or bad? I still cling to the outmoded
thought that it would be nice to be such a
sufficiently good generalist that you could know
a fair amount about everything. For example, in
today's AAS meeting program, Schneider gave a
talk on the Io Taurus and Io volcanoes, and there
was a very, very good audience of mostly
non-planetary people. So there's still some
semblance of people wanting at least no
highlights about everything. So in a way, it would
be nice to have everything in a couple of journals
because one's office isn't big enough to take them
all now. But the journals would be thicker now. But
the journals would be thicker and unmanageable.
So I don't know. I still think it's kind of
unfortunate that we have to specialize, but
there's no choice. We can survive this way, too. In
the so-called good old days, did stellar and
planetary astronomers ever talk to each other
anyway? I think some of them did.
Well, here's a good question, which your point
about the talk about the EOTR has brought up, and
this has to do with AAS having invited review
papers. Do you think that because of things like
that and a perhaps more open attitude on both sides
than we had 30 years ago that, for example,
planetary and real astronomers talk more than
they used to 30 years ago, or less, or about the
same? Probably more. For example, there's a large
interest in the folks that do star formation in the
early solar system now, because they're trying to
find analogs of the early solar system in the
Taurus cloud and other obscured places,
molecular clouds where young stars form. So
they're quite interested in planetary astronomy
at some level, maybe not in the geology of every
rock on Mars or the moon. But at some level, they're
definitely interested. So I think, in fact,
things are a little bit better And there's
moderately good communication. So I think having
invited talks on subjects where there's overlap
is very healthy and probably successful. So AAS in
its biannual meeting is, to some extent, doing
that. I don't know if the planetary division ever
has a talk. I think they do, by people interested,
for example, in star formation, which is at least
indirectly related to planetary formation. That
happens sometimes. You think a planetary
astronomy is a part of astronomy? Sure. I might
have a minority view on that. Yeah, it is. It is. A
lot of the techniques are the same. A lot of them are
different. If you go to the DPS, you don't hear a
tremendous amount about other fields of
astronomy, but you do hear something. Yeah, I
think scientists now are multidisciplined
enough in their brains to realize that a sharp
division is artificial. Well, I know the DPS, I've
seen coronagraph pictures of some nearby stars.
Yeah, sure. Absolutely. This, again, is a
personal thing, but I'm going to try and build up a
consensus.